DramaRama - MUYSEM next steps
The mission of DramaRama is to provide an exciting educational platform that intellectual-honest students can utilize in practicing the 5 Elements of Effective Thinking and Make Up Their Software Engineering Mind by thinking through coding-puzzles  that will transcend into coding interview success & software passion. The current instantiation of MUYOM is incomplete because it lacks a fun environment with an understanding teacher. Unlike MUYOM, the provided puzzles are boring and without visuals. Additionally, nudges are dry because our Teacher Agent has no experience thinking effectively through puzzles themselves and therefore does not understand – it did not embrace the element of water in being able to suggest – which element will provide the most insight to the user. The objective of this paper is to lay out the next steps for DramaRama that would provide the greatest ROI in user engagement by implementing a proper instantiation of MUYOM. This all starts with understanding the corner-stone to MUYOM – to Change itself: intellectual-honesty.
A naive misconception about MUYOM is that it is a course with puzzles & answers in the same material – this would be true if the objective were to solve the puzzles! Rather, the objective is to apply all 5 Elements of Effective Thinking through them so that the puzzles & your mind begin to change. This goal reveals the core structure of MUYOM itself: intellectual-honesty. This is the Earth element of MUYOM itself which requires the students to be brutally honest with their effort in seeing the puzzles through all lenses possible. The elements are fractals which can be applied infinitely where your effort is the limit. It is however recommended that we spend the requisite time in The Puzzles section before moving on to the nudge section. When we spend a large amount of time trying to see the puzzles through all angles, we develop our own mental muscles and ideas about how to apply the elements. Once exposed to a new way of thinking, we are more receptive & aww-struck and incorporate the methods easier! If we just skip ahead, we miss out. Intellectual honesty is trusting the process; it’s exactly what needs to be refined in DramaRama! This refinement starts with the elements. 
In MUYOM, we first read the elements and understand their “why” before diving into the puzzles. This sets the stage for the reader that the elements are the tools at hand and applying them to the puzzles is the objective. Additionally, when the user needs to reference the elements they can simply flip a few pages and do so – the book format allows the elements and the puzzles to be held in the same hand! Currently, the app does not have an introduction to the elements and assumes that the user knows to visit the reference page. Thinking through algorithms can be more difficult than the puzzles in MUYOM because we need to type-out our responses; the need to switch to a different page to view the elements is an unacceptable mental context-switch. The pivot that we need to make is to a single-page workspace. We should have an “Elements” slider, the current puzzle we are working on, and the nudge all in one page. This would allow the user to experience the fullness of MUYOM by being able to zone-in and see the unifying course picture. Now, providing an introduction as to how to apply the elements is the last priority – we expect our first users to be a little familiar with MUYOM. As we start getting less familiar users we can start bringing in more learning resources. Also, it can definitely be possible to have our Teacher Agent make the learning materials itself, showing how it applies the 5 Elements to a puzzle. Speaking of puzzles, when it comes to the app, they are very boring and empty – something we need to cover. 
Though the app’s puzzles are closely related to what users will face in technical coding interviews, the reason this is not a proper instantiation of MUYOM is that the coding puzzles themselves are not engaging. The puzzles in MUYOM are visual and fun and they do not require you to type anything which gives you the creative freedom of iterating your ideas in your mind. The partial solution has already been mentioned: unify the elements, puzzle, and nudge into a single page. Context switching between LeetCode and DramaRama (when referencing the elements or metrics) is mentally draining! Secondly, typing our response in the Chatbot is extremely uncomfortable because it is small (for a framework that thrives on creative expression) and does not have code formatting or intellisense – we should use our own (although we will never remove the need for writing out the algorithm, we can provide a large interface the user can type on and feel zoned into the puzzle). Lastly, being inside LeetCode disconnects us from the larger MUYOM picture since we are in an environment that is dark and cold – UX plays a massive part psychologically. Now, provided that we move the workspace to our app, we only solve the fun problem partially as we still have boring algorithms! What we can do here is have the user type in which algorithm they are wanting to think-through and we can create an AI Agent that will make the puzzle more fun and visual. By implementing these changes we can keep the user engaged in the puzzles! However, after the user spends a sufficient amount of time thinking through the puzzles, they will be provided with a flattering-nudge form the AI Agent that has not personally thought-through the puzzle. In MUYOM, it is apparent that Mr. Burger has fully applied the 5 Elements to a puzzle when he explains which element would expose the most structure to it. This understanding comes from practice – something our AI Agent needs to undergo. 
When it comes to the nudge, this may be the most important piece. The nudge is responsible for getting the user’s mind into the right flow. We can provide the wrong nudge, which sends the user down a direction that does not lead to the answer; why is that bad if the answer does not matter? In one sense, it is not bad if our only goal is creativity and practicing effective thinking. But if we also want to hit the second target – which is actually getting the answer – then we should aim to guide the user’s elemental frame toward solving the problem. Form is important here, just like it is important to keep proper form when working out in order to get a better physique. As mentioned, the nudges in the app are extremely basic and merely flatter the user rather than direct them towards the next flow of ideas. We’ve discussed that the solution to this would be having the AI Agent personally work through a puzzle with the elements and find as many flows of ideas to the answer as possible (we’d aim at a 50-100). This would be a process that would get run as a background task (not through the UI). We would need the Agent to see its application to the puzzle as an incremental flow of ideas triggered by a concrete methodical order (Earth ->  Fire ->  Air -> Water -> Quintessential). For example, we’d have the Agent start at Earth 1.0, get an epiphany, move onto Earth 2.0 where it would spotlight the specific with that epiphany, get a new idea, move onto Earth 3.0 and apply 3 adjectives to that idea, etc. The key here is that when we start off with a new element or prompt, we will have a new flow of ideas than the last prompt. If we can produce a 50-100 flow of ideas for a puzzle and the user asks for a nudge, we will likely come across a flow that is very similar to the user’ current thought process. So after thinking through the problem by itself, the Agent would generate multiple flows to the answer, and then analyze the user’ interaction with the puzzle and match it best with a succeeding flow – in some ways, this is even more than what MUYOM provides. This makes spending time thinking-through the puzzles more fun because the user knows that their thought-processes will be thoroughly analyzed; that the quality of their nudge is directly correlated to their level of engagement with the puzzles. This is true both technically and through an intellectual-honest lens as described earlier. In addition to the AI integration, we want the hint to come on a user’s request rather than triggered when done with a session. In MUYOM, the user visits the hints section (the upside part) when they want to, why should DramaRama be otherwise? 
In conclusion, the first step for DramaRama is to remove the extension workflow and create a single workspace where the user can easily reference the elements, work-through the puzzle, and access the nudge on request. Next, we are to make our own fun puzzles that are based on real algorithm problems; the user will be provided with a list of LeetCode problems where when opened it is far more engaging and would require the same implementation. The difference? Because the puzzles are engaging the user will spend more time – which is what actually matters – rather than quitting because they are forced to provide an answer. Next, we will make the nudges more impactful by having an AI Agent apply a bunch of elemental combinations that lead to an answer and compare which one is closest to the current user’s thought process & implementation. 
