Making Up Your Own Mind – Definition

What is Making Up Your Own Mind (MUYOM), is the question that this paper will answer. On a high-level, it is a minds-on book/course (by Edward Burger) that trains the reader how to apply the 5 Elements of Effective Thinking (5EET) to small puzzles with the hope that they will apply them to the larger puzzles in life. 5EET (also by Edward Burger) is a book that offers ways of thinking that involve deeper-levels of creativity and effectiveness than critical thinking. First, this paper will cover the basics: the different elements and how to use them, the structure of the puzzles in the book, and the critical hints provided that fosters alignment and growth. Secondly, it will cover my own opinionated applications of the elements to the books/software-engineering puzzles I faced. Lastly, it will conclude on the problems that have hindered my application of the concepts in the course in real-life. Join me, as we embark on one of the most life-changing systems I have ever adopted. 

The elements begin with Deep Understanding and end with Change; Deep Understanding in anything in life changes who we are as people. 

🌳Earth is the element of Deep Understanding. Understanding is not a binary proposition but a spectrum and wherever we are we can always push ourselves to understand deeper. We can provoke our mind to think in an Earthly way with 3 prompts. The first is to start with the simple. The idea here is that by mastering the basics, we will naturally begin to understand the complexities of the given subject. Whenever facing a challenge, we should avoid it and probe a simpler problem in which we are grounded; in doing so, we will start to see patterns that exist both in the simple example and the original problem. True masters in any craft are those that have mastered the fundamentals. The book mentions a story regarding multiple trumpet players playing very complex & intricate pieces of work. After all of the trumpet players finished, the master then told them to play some very basic (almost child-like) pieces. Each sounded the same until the master began to play; the sound, the notes, and the tempo of his trumpet was so beautiful that it was clear who was the best – something not as obvious on the more complex pieces. The second prompt is to spotlight the specific. The idea is to create a special case or specific example, probe it, and then recast whatever findings found to the larger problem. Being part of the Earth family, the example needs to be more simple than the original problem. Lastly, we have the most fluid prompt which is to add the adjective. It is exactly what it says: if we want to understand anything more deeply we should add an adjective (or descriptor) where we are to NOT leave for another descriptor until an insight is revealed. If the puzzle is deeply multi-faceted – meaning, it may require multiple perspectives – then this approach is ideal! Each of these prompts requires patience — as we may believe that focusing on the basics is pointless – and strategy – like which examples should I create that would best expose the structure in the original problem or which adjective should I choose that would lead me to uncover the essential misunderstandings. 

🔥Fire is the element of failure; it is the most painful and rewarding approach in generating new insights. While we may not always know how to do something right, we certainly know how to do it wrong! Failing is the best teacher we have where we must hold onto each failed attempt as a precious joule until some new insight is realized. The beauty of failing is that it tells you exactly what did and did not work. Because each action we take will involve mostly failure & some success, this means that we should also learn from each of our applications of any element. There are 3 prompts we can use to provoke our minds to embrace it. The first prompt is to fail fast. We should never stare at a blank screen but instead write (or create) a rough draft where now we have something in which to respond too. When we care about failing we actually hinder our minds from being creative. There is actually a flow that happens when we don’t worry about failure which produces both junk & gems. We should be careful to not block this flow at all costs and to refine the result once it is done. We should inspect the result and see where we have a lack of understanding and fill in those gaps. The second prompt is to fail again. Imagine someone gives you a very difficult challenge and then tells you that it is a requirement that you fail 10x to succeed. The attitude now is, 1 down, 9 to go, we’ve made progress! This prompt is both a call to be persistent & appreciative of failure. Many times when we approach a difficult challenge, we wait for the failure to occur rather than actively pursuing it as progress! This is a mindset change to pursue the goal of deep understanding rather than “actual” progress in the challenge. We must realize that failure – when learned from – is indeed progress. Lastly, if we take the idea of failure seriously then we must also intentionally fail; we should create completely unrealistic scenarios. This approach allows us to think outside of the box and consider scenarios that we would not have otherwise. Once we have come up with an extreme-case, we then need to try taming it by analyzing the exact break-point and what may or may not have promise. Again, the objective with the extreme-case is to hold on to the failed attempt as a precious joule and create deeper understanding into the original issue. 

💨 Air is the element of creating questions. It is the most straight-forward approach into probing a puzzle and generating deeper understanding. This is NOT the act of asking a question but rather the art of continuously creating them. Wherever we are we should force ourselves to NOT be passive observers but rather be innately curious about the subject at hand; it’s a state of mind. The first prompt to provoke this state of mind is to be your own Socrates. Socrates asked the meta-questions, like why. A meta-question is a question that asks about the big picture structure or objective. It pushes us to ask, “Are we considering the right question?” since we may indeed be down the wrong route of reasoning. The second prompt is to ask a basic question. If we notice that the puzzle that we are facing requires fundamental knowledge that we lack, we must therefore ask fundamental questions for fundamental break-throughs. Lastly, the third prompt is to ask another question. We may be stuck on a puzzle and in order to refresh our thinking, we should ask another but related question. The idea is that if we can ask another question that is related to the puzzle’s question, we may direct our mind to provoke an insight around the original question. If no insight gets created, we can come back to the original puzzle more refreshed. 

🌊Water is the element of seeing the flow of ideas. Whenever we are trying to understand a subject deeper, we need to approach that process with the lens that each idea was derived from a prior idea and will transcend into a new idea. For example, when learning Calculus 1 we may fall prey into believing that each topic is standalone and unrelated to other topics. When we think like this, we often rely on memorization of formulas rather than asking “why?”. Just like many subjects in life, Calculus 1 is deeply interconnected where the 2 main topics are derivatives and integrals. If we approach our learning knowing that, we will have an open mind to see the interconnected structure. The first prompt to provoke this mode of thinking is to run down all paths. This requires the determination to stick with one idea until it becomes obvious that it is a dead-end. When that is the case, we go down another path and do the same. As we do this, we are able to see which ideas don’t work and which ideas have promise. At each dead-end, we must ask why it is a dead-end and understand deeply. The second prompt is to Embrace doubt. We should understand that empathy and sympathy are not the same and consider alternative perspectives to the puzzle that we are facing. We should never be 100% sure about anything. This is the state of having an open-mind and being open to being wrong. Lastly, the third prompt is to never stop. We should always strive to see an idea flow to the very end. A lot of times, when we get a new idea we celebrate (rightfully so). However, the birth of a new idea is just the beginning where the real heavy-lifting comes from asking, “What’s next”? 

🪨The Quintessential element is change. When we challenge ourselves to apply the first four elements of thinking, the puzzles themselves begin to change! Changing the way we see the puzzles in our lives is the purpose of the other elements. By applying ourselves to the struggle of the smaller puzzles — practicing the four elements of thinking through them – we will start to notice that our brain itself begins to change. What is change in reference to the puzzles? It is seeing the puzzle in a new light after applying the 4 different lenses to it. Every puzzle has a structure where the 4 elements of effective thinking help us to uncover it. When we see structure it is a Eureka moment, an insight that we get. Change goes all ways. The puzzle changes when we apply an elemental lens. The elemental part of our brain changes (that is the way we think) when we challenge ourselves to see the puzzle through each lens. However, the most important piece of change is that we start seeing the problems we face in life as puzzles. Life is a series of easy, medium, and hard puzzles that we mistakenly try to solve. We should not try to solve the puzzles in life but rather think through them and as a byproduct have it be solved. Solving the puzzles should NEVER be the goal, we should always try to think through them, interact with them, love them! When we love something we want to truly know and understand. And therefore, that is what we should do with the puzzles in our life and what the book offers. 


The Puzzles

We’ve spoken about the 5 elements of effective thinking and their applications to the puzzles in the book. However, we have not truly discussed the puzzles in the book and how they were designed. A puzzle is a problem, game, or activity that is designed to test your ingenuity, thinking, or patience. When something is tested it either gets stronger or breaks. When we go to the gym, we test our muscles so that they become stronger. The pain we endure and the nutrition we consume after is essential for becoming stronger. After going to the gym on a consistent basis and being patient, only then will we notice that our body begins to change into a better version of ourselves. Those who benefit the most from the gym fall in love with the process. They do not do it for some means or gain but rather because they truly enjoy it. That joy does not come naturally & neither do we always enjoy the gym. It is a joy that we create. No one naturally loves pain. But everybody can always love the pain. Loving the pain takes action, effort, patience, and dedication. When it comes to the puzzles in the book, they are the weights in the mental gym. Just like a physical gym has a pull-up bar (for example) made for hanging and working out our arms, so does the mental gym have specific elemental weights for working out our mind. The weights are specific to the elements. For example, one puzzle may require greater empathy — it is muli-fauceted — which would require adding the adjective (Earth 3.0). But isn’t the objective to apply ALL the elements of effective thinking? That is correct. However, this is where we need to consider the start of the flow of ideas and pick the right element to begin with. In truth, we do care about solving the puzzles, but NEVER at the expense of deeper understanding! If we simply apply the 5 elements of effective thinking to the puzzles in our day to day life and never actually generate epiphanies or solutions, the elements have failed their purpose. The reason is because over time, they should have made you into a stronger person and as a result helped you get a solution to the puzzle. Therefore, there are a few things we need to note when we are applying ourselves to the puzzles and that is the structure of the puzzles in the book. Firstly, the solution matters. Secondly, they are interconnected. Lastly, they are logical. 

When we work out, we expect to have bigger muscles. If we are not working out, we can either blame the machines or us. Most of the time the problem of us not becoming stronger is our fault. However, as we abstract into the mental domain things become more complicated and the need for guidance is much more needed. When we are in the fog in life, one of the best approaches to getting through the fog is by having a strong goal. We are humans and are goal crazy! When it comes to the puzzles in the book, Burger emphasizes that the purpose of the puzzles is to not solve them but rather to think through them. Whatever our goals are, that is what we see in life (this is demonstrated by the gorilla experiment). Our goal should be to see the puzzles in as many different lenses as possible which in turn results in deeper understanding. When our goal is deeper understanding we begin to see the structure in a new light and as a result we naturally solve the puzzle. If our attempt was to brute force through a puzzle, we’d most likely get stuck and quit. And if we somehow succeed, we’d miss out on the deep understanding we could have gained where we would have applied it to the larger puzzles! The solution is important and we must prioritize that secondly. In the world we live in, we are pushed to always perform and produce results. It is true that it is important. So if the goal is to prioritize the application of the elements and not solving the puzzle, then how do we properly perform? “I don’t have all day” I hear you saying. The way we do this is by setting the right start of the flow of ideas that would lead to a solution. Think of the flow of ideas as the application between the 4 elements where the linkage between them is intuition and hopping to a new idea as a result of the provocation of thought by one element to the next. If we can become masters at identifying the puzzle, what element (lens) would shed the greatest light on the structure of the element, we can then become more effective thinkers. What I mean by being an effective thinker is that we can develop a deeper understanding of the puzzle at hand while actually producing a practical answer that is acceptable to the world of demand. Now that we know the various elements, how can we understand which elements match what puzzles? We must analyze the basics first, which is the process.

When I am presented with a puzzle, the first thing that I do is start with Earth and then cycle to Fire, Air, and Water. The starting of Earth is built-in to who I am as a person. I’ve always been a person who cares about the foundation. I have always been known for spending precious time on the basics & fundamentals of a topic. A great example is that I am a Christian but I have spent the last 5 years of my life on the 5 books of Moses where I’ve constantly returned to the fundamentals. I would not allow myself to continue to further books until I felt that I have invested the proper amount of time in the fundamentals. I am a person who can easily get lost in the basics. I think it is great to know what kind of person you are and how you would apply the elements of effective thinking differently and more naturally than others. But the reason I believe I am pointing this out is because it can be a hurdle and deceiving to the true nature of the puzzle. We need to watch out for our biases and at the same time understand them and that they can be strengths. This is challenging. Something I noticed that kind of helped with this is the third section of the book, the hints. In one of the seasons in my life, when I finally felt that I have spent the necessary amount of time thinking through the puzzles in the book, I hit the 3rd chapter which prompts which element would have been better for me to use. When I started to see which elements are more effective in seeing the structure of certain puzzles AND seeing the software problems in my work as software puzzles, I began to apply the same mental flow or state of mind to my software puzzles. I noticed patterns but it is hard to explain what patterns I noticed exactly. Let me give it a shot below. 

🧩🌳

I’ve noticed that earth is always helpful when working on any puzzle. It is the element where the basics always need to be sharpened and doing so will always shed greater light onto the larger structure at hand. As I have said earlier, it is my go to element when I approach a puzzle and I have noticed Burger recommending it as the go to element for hints in the puzzles. This corresponds greatly with the saying that: “When the going gets tough, tough leave.” I’d say that this approach is needed when the topic is new to you. Trying to do any of the other elements would be putting yourself into quicksand! However, this element can also waste time depending on the puzzle. If there is no reliable documentation on the puzzle at hand and the objective is vague, working on Earth would be very challenging. The reason is because one would need to lay out the foundation across more space and this would take a lot of time. When considering which element to use, we must understand the time we have for the puzzle as well. If the task is large and it involves understanding a lot of different components and ecosystems then no matter what we should focus on Earth. Notice, I mentioned that there is already an existing ecosystem! However, if there is not an existing ecosystem, then we should generally try avoiding Earth unless the puzzle is large. This is where we want to use Fire.

🧩🔥

When we do not have an existing eco-system, we need to create it quickly. The best way to do so is by quickly and cheerfully failing. When we do so, we now have junk & joules. The goal is to find the joules nested in the junk. If you are in the fog and don’t know where to go, the best thing to do is to just go somewhere! This usually hurts the most because we need to develop an existing environment from nothing! The hard thing also is that when we fail and we begin to refine our failed attempt, we are ALREADY killing pieces of ourselves because that is what I already believed in! This element is quite draining and should be used if we know the eco-system we are in. It is more helpful than wasting time trying to understand an eco-system that is not developed or does NOT exist at all! This is also a great element when we face a road block that is “scary.” Fear is a time-killer as it makes you waste an enormous amount of time trying to work around something only to realize there is no risk in doing so. We must be vigilant regarding the puzzles around us to ensure we are asking the right question. Speaking of questions, we have Air. 

🧩💨

Raising questions is by far the most important thing we can be doing. As mentioned, none of the elements are valuable without Air since if there is no internal curiosity then no insights are created and deeper understanding is not realized. Air is the element that should ALWAYS be used. Just like a bike, there are gears to Air and how to use them. Asking meta-questions is great when the eco-system is not as developed (just like we used Fire). The result of asking such a question is one of drastic change that is easy to be made when laying out the foundation. When the eco-system is already developed, we should ask fundamental questions for fundamental breakthroughs! This is correlated to Earth. If we have been struggling with a problem for a long time, we should ask another question that is related to the original puzzle. When we do this it resets our thinking. We can do this if we are working on a puzzle and find a task that is easier to implement where we can just do that instead and get an insight into the first task. This involves strategic-task-queuing. 

🧩🌊

There are 2 ways of using the element of water that make it effective: foundation or persistence. If we are in a well built out eco-system that is new to us, we should consider the core ideas that every other idea connects to; there are a few major ideas. Once we understand those major ideas, we should deepen our understanding of those ideas and then question how other aspects of the app connect to them. This is helpful when we are trying to understand a complex eco-system quickly. Secondly, we should ALWAYS appreciate the flow of ideas. If we are in an existing eco-system, we need to understand that all of the ideas in the application originated from a previous idea. We need to see the application of any element as part of an existing flow of ideas. We need to be persistent so that we can gain some new insight. 

My Hinderance

To conclude, the greeted hindrance that I face in my work is moving fast with the elements and producing results quicker in my work. Because my objective is deeper understanding, I often find myself spending a lot of time on problems that “should” be quick. This system makes the process of the learning fun but as a result it slows down the process. This is NOT always the case where I should have slowed-down to speed up in many instances. But it makes sense that if the objective is deeper understanding where the second goal is to actually get the task done, of course it would take us longer than brute-forcing – this is an idea that is often misleading which causes us to hate learning and be confused about our skills as a thinker. If we are not actively trying to see the problems we face as puzzles and apply our thinking from smaller thinking exercises, we set ourselves up for failure! Then how do I ensure that I can solve the puzzles in my job faster? It lies in the second statement I made regarding the smaller exercises. We must become better at effective thinking through the smaller puzzles with speed and not just ALL the time in the world. The smaller puzzles need to be properly oriented and constructed to help us become better software engineers where we need to make them more specific!

