Making Up Your Own Mind – My Experience 

The statement ”do what you're passionate about” can be an impossible task given the fast-paced cold-harsh reality of life and the continual pressure to perform in order to survive. This is why we all face the everyday life dilemma of doing what we hate and (sometimes) doing what we actually love to do. Have you ever wondered why you can play a game for hours and yet working on your career is the most boring part of your life? We always had the intellectual capacity (proven by our extensive gaming) and yet we find it so difficult to direct that energy into what actually makes a difference in our lives. Perhaps our passion is in work that is valuable and makes money – more power to you; the likelihood of that being the case is very slim. A better solution would be to instead “become passionate about what produces value” — this cultivates a character that is truly futureproof given the AI technological advancements today that require learning new software on a continuous basis. This paper covers my learning journey as a software engineer through the book The 5 Elements Of Effective Thinking (5EET) and the sequel Making Up Your Own Mind (MUYOM) by Edward B. Burger. I used to hate software engineering and got fired from my job due to underperformance where I faced over 1.5 years of financial hell. My experience resonates with 30-40% of students who take Computer Science majors only to drop out (where this number is 56% of students who choose a STEM field in general) – no one questions the incentive to pursue such a career! Pursuing a STEM field is extremely rewarding given the technological advancements with AI today, not even counting the high-job demand, career stability and compensation. The people who will gain most value from this paper are those who want to jumpstart their learning and cultivate love for their work that naturally produces fruit in a competitive career – it assumes that people know that software engineering is that career. Becoming a master is not easy and requires 10,000 hours where it is those who can become patient in the molding process that reach it. MUYOM helped me cultivate a heart that loves learning and it can for you!

Throughout my school years, I have always been a “Slow Learner” – concepts were a lot harder and longer for me to comprehend than my fellow classmates. These classmates were 1-2 years older than me (this made them bigger and smarter than me) which made me feel like an outsider; in addition, I grew up in a Ukrainian household and could not relate to “Americans.” Exams were always my greatest fear at the end of the school year where I would either be the last or in the last 5 students to finish! I remember taking hours to finish the exam only to find out that my grade was average. I hated school and did not have habits of learning unlike my pears who would be bookworms. I understood that reading books helped the mind be more creative but did not cultivate that habit. I was hyper-aware of my intellectual faults and knew I did not know much. However, I can remember moments when I was taking an exam that I had peace. There were moments where I was deeply frustrated that I did not understand the problem at hand where something in me clicked and I imagined myself as a robot. I imagined my hands moving like a robot and analyzing the problem at hand and making cold-logical decisions. Unfortunately I cannot recall the result of the exam but what I do know is where you find your peace when it gets hard is generally what molds you. At the age of 15 I had a mentor in my life that told me to get into software engineering – no questions asked, I decided that if I wanted to be successful (as he was) then I must listen to him. The goal was concrete but the process certainly was not; I found myself for years struggling to motivate myself and uphold a stable routine where sometimes I had months at a time where I quit. However, I’ve also had a determination to keep going (the evidence is in 3 times I got 1st place in my school’s yearly race out of my grade). I applied various creative approaches to disciplining myself like the CRAFT method (self-image enhancement approach from Psychocybernetics) and seeing & treating myself like a stranger that I am responsible for helping (an approach from 12 Rules for Life). Reflecting and creating personal systems has always been a part of my life where I am at peace and time stands still. However, having a love for planning does not equate to a love for learning Software Engineering where many basic concepts like interfaces & polymorphism were still difficult for me to understand. In addition, I had no serious projects even though I have been learning programming for multiple years (other than small games like Tetris & an unfinished Asteroids project). At 18, I then took a Calculus 1 class that changed everything. 

With the knowledge that Calculus 1 had a withdrawal/fail rate of 30-50% on average, I was petrified when my class started. What I found very helpful to learning as a homeschooler was the many YouTube videos I can watch. I was very good at looking at a person's teaching and figuring out if I liked them or not. I came across multiple math teachers where I came across these old videos by a guy (Edward Burger) wearing extremely colorful shirts! Skeptical, I gave it a shot. The more I watched Edward Burger, the more I loved his teaching style. He taught in a fun & playful manner. He had controversial ideas which was to NOT memorize anything but to learn how to derive a formula. The joy and fun that he had in math I wanted! I began to closely pay attention to how he thinks where he would talk about different ways of thinking. I can recall one time he said: “When the going gets tough, the tough leave.” Which means to not focus on a difficult problem but instead find easier problems that you can solve – a paradigm shift as I always thought that I should just try thinking harder. I purchased one of his books (5EET) and incorporated the learning into a daily routine on my porch. Therefore, I read Burger’s book in the morning & watched his videos when I was learning about Calculus 1 – I felt at peace and as though he was my personal guide in this tough class. His learning approach is what eventually helped me get an A on my Calculus 1 exam. 

5EET are creative ways of thinking that are designed to provoke insights into a puzzle where each leads to a deeper understanding and mental change when applied. Earth is getting your understanding grounded. Fire is being comfortable failing and learning from those attempts. Air is the art of creating questions instead of being a passive observer. Water is seeing the flow of ideas. Lastly, the Quintessential element is the element that each element points to which is Change – the cornerstone of Education. For each element, the book provides a prompt that the reader is to apply to an area in their own life. For example, one of the prompts for Earth was to get one’s thinking grounded in the basics by choosing a field, boiling it down to the fundamentals, and then learning about those “obvious” topics and finding the gaps in one’s understanding. This was an element that I applied to a Rubik's cube after reading 5EET on the porch where I first only mastered getting one side complete. Instead of trying to solve the whole puzzle, I instead became a master at smaller tasks where I would try beating my time record of how fast I could do just one side! This got me hooked on the Rubik’s cube where I naturally just wanted to play with it and began mastering other aspects of it. There was even a time that I was dreaming about the cube! Seeing the effects of 5EET on the smaller puzzles in my life, I wanted to apply the same approach to my Calculus. As my course was progressing, I decided that I would master a basic subject (I believe it was graphing integrals) and spend a lot of time doing it. At first it was hard but as I became better at it I started to love the processes. Naturally, my understanding of that topic would spill into other areas of the subject naturally. I fell behind in the class because it was fast-paced but when it came to the exam I got an A since I genuinely understood Calculus 1! Because the process was fun and it felt like a game to me, I found myself naturally pulled to the subject where I spent full days just working on it. I felt alive! After the class had ended and I felt comfortable with my understanding of 5EET (I had read it countless times), I then began reading MUYOM. 

MUYOM is the sequel to 5EET and is a minds-on course in making the elements part of you. It provides puzzles for the reader to interact & apply these ways of thinking with the hope that the reader would naturally do the same to the larger puzzles in their own lives. The book contains some quick definitions of the elements – with 3 prompts for each. Then, it provides a ton of puzzles for the reader to interact with. Once the reader puts in a serious amount of time struggling with the puzzles, they are then to read the next chapter which provides a hint as to which element to apply best for the corresponding puzzle. Burger explains that the objective of the puzzles is NOT to solve them, but rather to think through them using 5EET. Perhaps the reader has already seen the puzzle and knows the answer? It does not matter, the reader should apply all 5EET to the puzzle anyways and try seeing it in as many new ways as possible. It is a course that requires brutal intellectual honesty that one is putting in the uncomfortable application of the elements. In my experience, I spent months (not every day) stuck on the first puzzle. I did not want to pick up the next puzzle until I felt that I had truly grappled with one puzzle. I was deeply motivated by the notion of applying the elements to larger puzzles in my day to day life. I used to work on construction with my dad where I would apply the elements to real world scenarios outside of Calculus 1. I can recall a time when our water-pump stopped working where me and my dad had to pull it out of the well. I began thinking about it in a basic lens (Earth), what-can-go wrong lens (Fire), how was a specific component connected to the water-pump as a whole (Water), and just plain asking questions (Air). After some time, I stopped applying the elements in my life. They would only remerge when I got my first job. 

A few months later, I was very disappointed in myself that 3 years had passed and I was still trying to get a Software Engineering job. Based on my reading of the 4-hour work-week and taking advice from Tim Ferris, I decided that I needed to give myself incentives to change. Therefore, I started to punish myself every-time I failed to meet the goals that I had set. One time, I had a goal of finishing my school work but I failed and therefore I ended up forcing myself to walk around my neighborhood block shirtless (I was deeply insecure of my body). I implemented other punishments as well like asking out a girl in person, walking around the block shirtless again but doing burpees by the road, and posting videos on instagram regarding controversial things I believed in. I viewed my movement forward via punishments like a metaphorical vehicle that only drives when a sacrifice is made. For example, if I set a goal and did not implement the punishment, I would not take myself seriously next time – so the list of punishments that I had implemented looking back was the fuel for my next big task. However, I was still very fed up with where I was at in life. I set a very large goal: I was to buy a round-trip ticket to Houston, Texas (where my mentor lived) for 1 week and try getting a Software Engineering job. If I was to fail, I would punch someone in the face that I deeply disliked. I failed the goal and went back to Alaska. Did I punch them in the face? No. But I did get a job offer in about a month way beyond my experience level and pay I was targeting. I got very lucky and got hired as an Intermediate Core Java Engineer at JPMorgan & Chase. Again, it was a system that helped me. During my time at JPMC, I was applying the 5 Elements in my work by doing a lot of writing where I even got asked by my senior developer why I was doing that. The job was truly stressful and I was not ready for it where I got fired due to underperformance.

Now jobless and with a girlfriend, I thought that I would easily find a new job given that I had big corporate experience on my resume. For the first few months, I got contacted by many recruiters where I’d pass the screening, behavioral interview, but then fail on the coding interview. This happened to me at-least 15 times. The longer I was jobless, the worse my situation became. I started getting into debt where I was unable to pay for my rent. My car broke and I needed to drastically buy a new car. My bank account was always below zero. In addition, I lived far away from the city where I had to drop-off my wife at her college that I was trying to pay (international tuition) for as well. I made some money but at the expense of multiple people in my life. I had borrowed money from my parents and my brother. I overpromised the building of a website for my relative. I left off on a bad foot with an ex-boss I had regarding his website as well. The biggest obstacle that I was facing during this tough time was my inability to control my energy-flow (sex-drive). I’d either have a lot of sex or be lured into watching porn – both the biggest energy drainer which led to laziness on my part. This was a season in which I was deeply bitter and mad at God. I had said countless times that I was going to quit coding altogether and never do it again (something that I have been learning for years!). After more than 8 months of me being jobless, I decided something had to change. I recall looking at one painting of my’n – it had abstract cosmic circles that I had made myself – where I figured it out: I need connectivity in my life! I then decided to lay out goals that I always wanted to do and recall times that I felt alive in my life! Among those times was when I was doing Calculus 1 & thinking through the puzzles of MUYOM. I found and began taking the book seriously again. One of my goals was to increase my intellectual capabilities and the beauty behind MUYOM was that it provided me a way to track my progress. I was able to combine the work that I had to do with the 5EET. For example, when I was working on a website for a client that needed me to do research, I broke the research into elemental sections. I’d ask what were the basics of this (Earth), what about the potential failures (Fire), etc. This helped me be consistent and I found peace. I even started to draw the human brain that was infused with the 5 Elements which took me a month of consistent work in 5 minute intervals – it was the best work of art I have ever made! MUYOM  taught me to start looking at the problems I was facing as puzzles to be solved! Another example is when my mentor advised me to reach out to agencies and try to get a job that paid bottom dollar, I provided the same approach as I did to the puzzles in the book: I did not try to get the task done but instead do as many iterations of the 5EET as possible. Finally, I started to notice progress in my job search. Before I was embracing 5EET, I would apply to some agencies and then give up – it felt hopeless and I fell prey to laziness. But once I applied 5EET, I changed my goal which was to apply the elements rather than to get an interview; I was persistent and found it fun. Atlast, I came across a company and got an interview. But like always, I failed the coding interview. After meeting a friend of my’n Abdullah he advised me to do Uber Eats and get something stable. I listened to the advice where some days I spent more than 13 hours delivering food to make around $200 – about $200 less than what I made working at JPMC working for 8 hours. This was most certainly a blow to my ego and it taught me patience. It was hard seeing myself earn $5 every 20 minutes add up to $1600 in addition to college payments I was making for my wife that was around $4000 every semester. However, I was determined. I decided that I would learn coding while delivering food & people. While driving, I started listening to coding podcasts and cycling in my mind 5EET. For each element I would ask a question based on the nature of it. So for the element of Earth I’d ask a question like: “What are the fundamentals of pandas?” or for the element of Air, “Why does pandas matter?” as Air 1.0 is to ask the big questions – to be your own Socrates. This became like a game for me to see how many questions I can ask throughout the day. Before driving off to work I made it part of my routine to read MUYOM and actually interact with the puzzles. I saw my financial situation as a puzzle to be solved and I had fun. It was fun seeing how many questions I can ask compared to the day before. It was also interesting to see what insights I would get based on the questions I asked. One day, I picked up a firm partner from BakerTilly from the airport where we kicked-off a conversation about Alaska. I expressed that I am looking for a Software Engineering job and he said that he would help me. About 3 months later, I got the job!

When I began working at BakerTilly, my application of MUYOM only became stronger. When I would work on a puzzle in the book and then work on a software problem I was facing, I would view that problem as a puzzle and felt the same neuro-pathways trigger. I would even apply the same way of thinking that was triggered by one of the elements when I was working on a puzzle to my software problem and get Eureka moments as well! I saw this akin to a fighter working out in the gym and then actually fighting; the same applies to the mind where I was training it and actually applied the same ways of thinking to the larger more complex puzzles in life. I can recall that I was excited to wake up everyday and think through software puzzles. One time when I was working and came across a problem (a software bug), I turned on some extremely fast-paced music and decided I was going to apply all 5 elements (12 actually given that each element has 3 sub-elements) and it felt like I was flying. I was able to quickly navigate the problem with only 3 elements from Earth (meaning I did not even need to get to the other 3 elements) and I figured out the problem. It was very important to see the connection from the simple puzzles in the book to the larger puzzles in my day to day life. What really helped capture the connections was the 3rd section of MUYOM which gave direction as to what element and way of thinking is best applied to the corresponding puzzle. When I continually revisited the first section of the book (the list of elements and the definition for each), I had my own understanding of how the element should be applied. However, when I saw how the creator “actually” intended the elements to be applied as, it gave me a boost – it felt like the mental pathways I’ve been building doubled in size. When I applied the same thinking to my software engineering puzzles, I was able to see through them more easily. In my mind, I was applying the same training to the software puzzle as I was in my daily MUYOM. I decided that I wanted to really make these elements part of me and that if I wanted to grow I needed to set goals. 

I started to track how much time I spent reading MUYOM and working through the puzzles in the book. I used the time I spent as a metric where I counted 30 minutes as 1 joule (self defined metric) produced. I started at 15 minutes per day and was religiously consistent for about 3 months (the longest habit I had ever kept in my life). Every week I would add 5 minutes to my daily routine of working through the puzzles. For the last 4 weeks I had 45 minutes every day invested in working through the puzzles where my last week was around 50 minutes per day. It was exciting seeing myself progress and it turned into an addiction! Given that I was doing so well with MUYOM I introduced a new metric called Weaponry – the practical weaponization of MUYOM – where I began to track my application of 5EET to the software puzzles I was facing; this proved to be a real challenge however since the application is vague! For example, one time I asked an Earth-1.0 question where I at that specific moment said that I earned 0.15 joules for doing so. Then, another time I would ask the same elemental question but not get an insight into the puzzle – therefore, I did not reward myself 0.15 joules but kept spending energy until I got an insight where that number than would jump to 0.30 (or even 0.50) depending on how well I “felt” the insight was. As soon as I started tracking this other metric my MUYOM progress started to go down drastically! For the first 2 weeks of Weaponry there was positive growth but after the 3rd and throughout it became negative with ups and downs. Eventually as time progressed, I had quit both metrics temporarily. There were problems I noticed: I did not prioritize the growth & stability of MUYOM & the joules produced in Weaponry were based on a feeling and not on an objective metric. “When we forget about our foundation that is when we lose our minds” is a quote I just said. Now that I look back, MUYOM was like the daily bread that I had eaten to prepare me for the battles. Also, when our metric is vague we cannot tell if we are growing or not! This results in a poor dopamine system (people who make video games know this). Going with the nature of the application, figuring out how to track Weaponry is perhaps the greatest puzzle to be solved.

Regardless of the failed system I have described above, I did not mention that I have been tracking my progress of MUYOM for close to a year now and Weaponry for close to half a year. For the last month, I have been reading MUYOM religiously everyday. I have not stopped and actually completely restarted my reading to the 1st puzzle of the book to ensure that I can get as much juice from the book as possible! For now, I stopped tracking Weaponry with joules. I realized that the problem with the introduction of Weaponry in my life was that I also began to only reward myself when I would get an insight into the puzzle. Ok but what about the hard-work I had invested into thinking through the software puzzle with MUYOM where I had not necessarily got an insight? That would be lost and not rewarded which is wrong! In MUYOM, Edward Burger’s prompt is that we apply the elements to the puzzles, not that we apply and try to get insights; though he says the ladder as well they are not mutually inclusive! I noticed that when my mind begins to try to solve the puzzle (instead of thinking through it), the process does not become a truly succulent learning experience but one of speed & cut-corners in one’s work. Edward Burger does not instruct us to solve the puzzles in MUYOM but to think through them. Why should we do differently for the larger puzzles we face? Burger does mention that a failed attempt is not valuable if we do not learn from it and gain a new insight into the original puzzle. But he also mentions that applying the elements is what produces the insights in the first place! 
But perhaps we should raise the question, why do we want to track self-constructed joules produced in Weaponry when we did not track self-constructed joules produced in MUYOM? All we tracked in MUYOM was how much time we spent but I wouldn’t really consider tracking the application of the joules. Should we track the application of the joules if it was not included in the curriculum of the book? It is an excellent question which is based on a much more simple question: Is it more important to track the time I spent doing something or is it more important to track when I did something? And if we go down the flow of ideas, what is that something? Perhaps Weaponry is a metric that each user needs to define for themselves? That most certainly could be the case. However, the solution I believe is targeting the root-problem and that is MUYOM as well! 

If the metric problem cannot be solved at the Weaponry level then we should solve it at the source problem and have Weaponry be free for the user. Let me explain. Through MUYOM, the process was that we’d apply the 5 Elements of Effective Thinking to the simple logic puzzles in the book. The puzzles were carefully crafted and selected so that the reader can practice these ways of thinking through them. After putting in a solid amount of time struggling through them, they would then go to the next chapter that would provide a hint as to which element should be used for the puzzle. This entails that the puzzles in the book were very carefully constructed. Now, imagine if we had puzzles that were carefully constructed around a software engineer's daily work instead of generic ones? And just like in the book, imagine that the software engineer would get hinted into using the right element? The linkage speed between puzzle & work would be drastically improved! Now if we take this a step further, imagine that you would have a real-time instructor that is tailored to your personality type and understands which element you are best at using and he trains you using the same puzzle-to-hint approach as defined in the book? This can be created with AI and is what I dream of building.
