DramaRama – Model

When it comes to truly mastering MUYOM and making it part of our lives we must see it as a model – a class that can be instantiated and applied to different avenues in life. The purpose of this paper is to clearly define the model so that we can define the Software Engineering instantiation of the next chapter MUYSEM.

At the heart of the model is change – the Quintessential Element. What is change? According to the book, change is what happens when the 5 Elements become part of you; it is when you naturally apply the elements to the larger puzzles in your life. This only happens through the struggle of thinking through the puzzles provided in the book – not just simply reading the book. There are 3 major components to the MUYOM curriculum: the 5 elements, the puzzles, and the coach. We’ve already covered the elements in the prior section and therefore will dive into the puzzles and coach. The puzzles are challenging, they come in a variety of types, and they are understandable. The coach is the structure of the curriculum that guides us to truly think through the puzzles. It is two-fold: intellectual honesty and nudging to think down the correct flow of ideas that leads to the greatest insights about a given puzzle!

Puzzles

Firstly, the puzzles are challenging, but it is this challenge that pushes our minds to grow. In the context of the book, a puzzle is an intellectual challenge that is designed to be thought through with creative, effective thinking elements; they are not meant to be solved but rather to be seen through many different lenses. Just like we would use weights to become physically stronger the same can be applied to the puzzles in growing mentally; the elements are the weights and the puzzles are the gym. When people go to the gym, they are not trying to solve a problem like being able to bench 300lbs. If we are eagerly trying to push our limits in the gym we are likely to get hurt and not grow at all! However, if we prioritize process and form where we are patient then we will grow. The puzzles in the book are designed to sway you into the wrong direction where they include details that don't matter and questions that imply a different approach. One example is the puzzle Three Switches, Two Rooms, and One Bulb. Given 2 rooms and a windy hallway connecting them where one room contains three identical light-switches –  two do nothing and one turns on a lamp in the second room, – what is the fewest number of trips up and down the hall required to determine which switch is the one that controls the lamp in the other room? When we hear “fewest number”, our mind instantly believes that this is an optimization puzzle. We get into the weeds by considering probability and considering what can be the different components of the hallway. In addition, this puzzle is extremely draining where it provokes doubt that we can’t further optimize beyond three trips up-and-down the hallway. We are nudged very hard to simply stay for three trips. However, if the puzzle had provided us a different question to begin with like, “Is it possible to figure out which light-switch controls the lamp in one visit?” we no longer focus on optimization but rather consider a one-go idea. This one-go idea is exactly what is needed to be on the proper flow of the puzzle and uncover more structure. The solution is yes, we can do it in one-go where we’d keep one switch off, turn one on, and turn the last one on for a few hours and turn it back off. Then, when we visit the room, if the bulb is off but NOT hot, it was the first switch. If it is on, then it is the second switch. And if it is off and hot, then it is the third switch. 

Secondly, these puzzles come in varieties. Some of them are more story focused, some are shape focused, some deal with match-sticks, and others are very long. The shape focused ones cause us to draw shapes on a piece of paper. The other matchsticks one as well cause us to be swayed in doubt as we consider the gaps that matches have and the 3d attributes of them. Others that are longer cause us to keep re-reading them to ensure we did not miss context –  this on its own may be swaying us from asking the right question. They come with decoys as well and we need to push ourselves to focus on the real questions. A great example of this is the super long puzzle called, The Crazy and Exceptionally Obnoxious CEO. This puzzle is very hard to understand because it is super long. I do NOT know of the solution yet to it however, I do know it is unique in that the author made it himself. And the other puzzles are very important as well. For example, the element of water is crucial when it comes to the matchsticks. When we uncover certain epiphanies in the matchsticks, we can apply those epiphanies to match-stick puzzles as well. 
Lastly, the puzzles are understandable. Context here is key. First off, the puzzle fits on a single piece of paper. When we read the puzzle, it takes us no more than 5 minutes to read it and understand the challenge at hand. For a broader audience, the puzzles presented in the book are perfect! However, if we want to instantiate the model (as we will discuss in the next chapter), the puzzles must be tailored to the instantiation. Regardless, a major problem with the puzzles presented in the book is that it does not clearly instruct us how to deal with puzzles in our day to day life when it comes to context gathering. When the puzzle is presented on a piece of paper (where we know the full context), we can easily cycle through the 5 elements. However, the problem arises when we are dealing with a puzzle that is NOT on a paper but scattered in our mind. What typically happens when we face actual puzzles in the read world is that we need to gather context, deepen our understanding, and form the right question. That can be painful if we do not have a firm grounding on the topic at hand. 5EET talks about having firm grounding and understanding the topic before diving into more complex aspects of it. However, this is a whole skill of its own. It would be so great if we can just deal with a real world puzzle and have it put on a paper for us to process just like the puzzles in the book! If the context behind the puzzles would be very complicated and hard to understand, applying the elements would prove a challenge due to the lack of grounding. I’ve faced this problem applying the 5 elements in my work where I’ve found it hard to apply Fire & Air & Water if my grounding was weak and poor. I had to force myself to first understand the environment I was in which felt like a very different workout than in the tasks in the book. One may say, well some of the puzzles in the book deal with lots of ambiguity like U-turn university – a puzzle in the book which is very abstract. I guess an argument can be made that a similar experience that one would face with real-world puzzles and the level of ambiguity that is faced can be equivalent to the vague puzzles defined in the book. I do NOT know if that is the case though. However, though abstract may mean missing context, a problem we face at work is compartmentalizing the problems we face into formatted puzzles we face defined in the book. MUYOM  in a sense spoon feeds us in that it gives us the puzzle with all of the needed information and the query being asked. In the real world, we must solve the puzzle by ensuring we have sufficient context and asking the right question. Then we may argue, isn’t that what MUYOM is already trying to teach us when it comes to the element of Air 3.0 (be your own Socrates)? Yes, but indirectly. What happens when we are provided a puzzle that is very difficult to understand? How do we approach it? How do we work on it? According to MUYOM, we should find easier problems that we can solve. But what if the problem is that we just don’t understand what is being asked of us? MUYOM pushes us to apply the elements in building deeper understanding but the problem is that many times we don’t know the problem. Therefore, an approach to this is to strengthen the puzzle to train us towards the fundamentals!

The Coach
Intellectual honesty is a term that many people do not fully understand. Yet it is an important one because it forces us to think through puzzles and grow in our effective thinking. We are intellectually dishonest when we do not push our creativity in seeing a puzzle through as many lenses as we truly can which takes time and real effort! This idea comes from the analogy of working out and getting stronger at the gym. If we are not willing to spend the necessary time at the gym, choose weights that are heavy enough to challenge us, and consistently go through the grind of trying to become stronger, then we will not grow. This is the main problem: growth. Growth is the key idea here. Intellectual honesty exists for the sake of growth, and it is also subjective to each person. When we are intellectually honest, we must ask ourselves: did we try hard enough for this part of our mind to grow or not? If we did, we would become stronger in that specific part of our mind. However, the problem with this approach is that we can go down a complete rabbit hole where we do not even get past the puzzle we are working on. I am not entirely sure what to make of that. The important thing is that if we are intellectually honest with ourselves, we honor the process rather than the outcome. Many people focus on the outcome instead of the process which leads to burnout when the going gets tough. A potential opposing idea to this would be what Jordan Peterson discusses when he talks about the importance of having a clear goal. When we work out our physical body, the process and growth is straightforward where we track both by how much (for example) weight we can bench while maintaining form. It gets complicated when we consider growth in our effective-thinking: how can you track that we are actually becoming more effective? The answer is NOT exactly clear but what we can say is that encapsulating effective thinking patterns can help us. When the goal is the process, we automatically reach the potential we are trying to achieve. This is one of the biggest problems with coding algorithm websites like Leetcode, where the objective is to solve an algorithm. In my experience, this left me to burnout where I quit doing so altogether! When we focus only on solving the algorithm, we are not actually solving the real problem, which is building the mental muscles that naturally led us to solving the puzzle. Ask yourself the following question: the last time you faced a serious intellectual challenge, how did you think through it? If you cannot answer the question then you are in the right place. What happens in our brains when we are trying to solve an algorithm directly is that we often waste time working with mental muscles we have never trained. This is a problem because when we encounter difficult challenges, we cannot properly engage those muscles. Usually, we try to attack it head-on or simply push through with brute force. But if we had strong mental frameworks and models already developed, we would approach the problem through applied and wired mental structures instead.That is the true secret we need to understand. If we know which mental muscles we have worked on, we can consciously activate and flex them. If we do not, then we are stuck. Before we get to the puzzles in MUYOM, Burger mentions that our “challenge is to apply all five practices of effective thinking and see the puzzle from as many different perspectives as possible” and that the “frustration is a healthy and often necessary part of true learning and growth.” Therefore, the reader is responsible for their own growth. However, the book does nudge the reader to think differently in chapter 3.
Lets say that you are given the 5 elements and the puzzles where you are told your task is to think through them. So, you start applying them and then you hit a road-block. Even though you are pushing yourself to see the puzzle in as many different lenses as possible, you simply do not see progress in your approach! You have never seen the elements actually applied by someone else and therefore you are stuck with your own application process. Did we read the 5EET description in MUYOM? Yes. But we still feel stuck. This feeling that we feel is perfectly justified because we are doing something without actually watching someone else do it. This is essential for us humans where if we want to grow and become better thinkers, we need to watch masters do it! It is for that reason why MUYOM has a third chapter focused on nudging the reader in the right flow of ideas. Each puzzle is different – as discussed – which creates a hierarchy of thinking-models that would provide the best ROI of understanding the structure and seeing the flow of ideas. After putting in the requisite time in thinking through the puzzle, we are invited to read the third chapter and get the author's perspective about the puzzle. This perspective is very valuable because the author shows how the elements “should” be applied to the puzzles. If we do NOT spend the requisite time on the puzzles, we will not value the author’s approach and forget it. But if we have, we will then learn from the master and think like he does. In essence, this is a slight embodiment of the element of the Fire because we are provided with the element definitions and then expected to apply them to the puzzles. And then when provided an example of how the author thinks about the puzzle, we (perhaps) learn from our application mistakes. It is important to note that chapter 3 does NOT provide the answer to the puzzle but provides a hint as to which element would work best. Unlike the hints we get in algorithm platforms like Leetcode, the hint MUYOM provides is far more interconnected to the process. One of the puzzles that the author discussed in that chapter was regarding the Star is born puzzle where he recommended using the element of Air 1.0 (be your own socrates). He recommended asking the question, What is the real question here? The puzzle was to draw a star that would as a result create 10 disjointed triangles. Intuitively, we try to solve the puzzle head by trying to modify the angles and create more triangles. After hours of working on this puzzle, I then asked, What is the real question here? As advised by Burger. I realized that a line is never ending and therefore we can create intersections outside the star! I then got a solution to the puzzle. 

Conclusion

The MUYOM curriculum is a model. The elements, puzzles, and coach in MUYOM are applicable to anyone who knows how to read. This book is the highest-level of abstraction that provides concrete & practical prompts any student can apply to gain deeper understanding and change. To apply the element of the Water – by extending the idea – to the book itself and optimize it for our specific puzzles we face, we need to instantiate; we need to pick a specific area in our lives and tailor the curriculum towards it. The next section will cover how we can create an instantiation called MUYSEM (Making Up Your Software Engineering Mind) and optimize the linkage between the components in the training and real-world software puzzles we face.
